# -Sales-Analysis-for-a-Multinational-Automobile-Company-in-the-US-
This data science research project  Analyses and presents the sales performance of a Multinational Automobile Company  Based in the United States. 



## Project Overview


This data science research project  Analyses and presents the sales performance of a Multinational Automobile Company  Based in the United States. 

The company’s sales transaction data generated over the past years was used for this  analysis.


The objective of the study is to analyze and identify the **Top 5 Most-Profitable States for the Bike Product Category in the United States**, offering critical business insights into regional sales dynamics, and strategic growth opportunities.


Leveraging advanced data analytics techniques, including data preprocessing, aggregation, and visualization, this project uncovers key patterns in regional sales dynamics across diverse markets. 


By ranking the States based on total profit generated, the analysis empowers business stakeholders with actionable intelligence to optimize regional sales management, tailor marketing strategies, and enhance profitability in a globally competitive landscape.

This project serves as a practical application of data science principles in the domain of e-commerce, showcasing the impact of data-driven decision-making on strategic business outcomes.



### Problem Statement  


**What are the Top-5 Most-Profitable States for the Bike Product Category in the United States ?**



### Project Objectives 


1. **To To collect, clean, and preprocess sales data from the multinational automobile company, ensuring data quality and consistency for accurate analysis
.**

2. **To filter and isolate sales records related specifically to the ‘Bike’ product category across all U.S. states for focused profitability analysis.**

3. **To calculate the total revenue and profit generated from bike sales per state, incorporating relevant metrics such as revenue, and profit.**

4. **To identify and rank the top 5 U.S. states based on total profit generated from bike sales within the specified timeframe.**

5. **To visualize sales performance by state using data visualization tools such as bar charts for clear and intuitive insights.**

6. **To derive actionable insights and recommendations for the company's sales and marketing teams on how to optimize their strategy in high-performing states.**



   ### Data Source


   **The Company's central transaction database**



   ### Project Methodology


   - **Data Collection**: Data was collected from the Company's Central Transaction Database

- **Data Pre-processing**: Loaded the data from a CSV file into a Pandas Dataframe

- **Data Inspection and Cleaning**: Checked for Missing values, Checked for Duplicates.

- - Handled missing values
  - Handled duplicate values

- **Data Modification**: generated some  core metrics which were NOT provided from the dataset, and would be required for the purpose of the data   analysis

- **Data Filtering**: To Filter out the required dataset(a subset data) for the analysis: Transactions on Bikes Products which occurred only in the United States**


- **Data Aggregation**: To Compute the major metric : **Total Profits generated by States in the US**

- **Data Sorting/ Data Ranking**: To Determine the Most Importat Metric:  **Top-5 Most-Profitable States for the Bike Product Category in the United States**

- **Data Visualization**: To uncover the **Top-5 Most-Profitable States for the Bike Product Category in the United States** in a pictorial form.

- **Data Interpretation**:

- **Key Findings**

- **Conclusions**

- **Reconmendation**



### Data Collection


Sales data was obtained from a central transaction database of the company representing orders placed by customers across multiple countries. Each record included attributes such as:

* `Customer ID`
* `OrderNo`
* `OrderQuantity`
* `CostPrice_usd`
* `SellingPrice_usd`
* `OrderDate`
* `CustomerName`
* `CustomerCity`
* `CustomerState`
* `CustomerCountry`
* `ProductCategory`
* `ProductColor`
* `Model`



### Data Pre-processing


**Data Loading**: 
Reading the Raw Dataset which originally existed as a CSV file into a Pandas Dataframe


~~~python
# solution

 
import pandas as pd

bikes_df = pd.read_csv("C:/Users/James/Downloads/bikes.csv")
bikes_df
~~~



### Data Inspection and Cleaning


- **1. Check for Missing values**:


~~~python
  # solution 
 
bikes_df.isna().any()
~~~



~~~python
# counting the number of missing values

Number_of_missing_values_per_column = bikes_df.isna().sum()
Number_of_missing_values_per_column
~~~


~~~python
# Total number of the datasets/datapoints

len(bikes_df)
~~~



~~~python
# visualizing the total number of misssing values

import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

Number_of_missing_values_per_column.plot(kind = "bar")
plt.plot()
~~~



- **2.Handling Missing values**:


~~~python
  # solution 

bikes_df_filled = bikes_df.fillna("Black")

bikes_df_filled
~~~



~~~python
# to verify that there are no more missing values on our dataset 

# solution 

bikes_df_filled.isna().any()
~~~


- **3. Check for  Duplicates**:


~~~python
  # solution

# counting the total number of our datapoint
len(bikes_df)
~~~


# dropping any duplicates if any exists 

# solution

bikes_df.drop_duplicates(inplace = True)


- **4. Handling Duplicates**:


~~~python
  # solution

# re-counting our data point again 
len(bikes_df)

# This shows that there was NO duplicates on our dataset
~~~


### Data Modification


~~~python
# generating some core metrics which were NOT provided from the dataset, which would be required for the purpose of the data analysis

# solution 

# (1) TotalCostPrice : To be obtained by (OrderQuantity x CostPrice_usd)


bikes_df["TotalCostPrice"] = bikes_df["OrderQuantity"] * bikes_df["CostPrice_usd"] 


# (2) SalesRevenue : To be obtained by (OrderQuantity x SellingPrice_usd)


bikes_df["SalesRevenue"] = bikes_df["OrderQuantity"] * bikes_df["SellingPrice_usd"] 


# (3) Profit : To be obtained by (SalesRevenue - TotalCostPrice)


bikes_df["Profit"] = bikes_df["SalesRevenue"]  - bikes_df["TotalCostPrice"]


# Displaying the result

bikes_df.head()
~~~


### Data Filtering


~~~python
# Filtering out the required datasat (a subset data) for the analysis

# Total Profits generated by States in the US

is_usa = bikes_df["CustomerCountry"] == "United States"

is_bike = bikes_df["ProductCategory"] == "Bikes"

bike_data_usa =  bikes_df[ (is_usa) & (is_bike) ]

bike_data_usa
~~~



### Data Aggregation


~~~python
# Computing/ Aggregating the sales data to show Total profit by states.

# solution 
Total_profit_by_states_bikes_usa = bike_data_usa.groupby(["CustomerState", "CustomerCountry"])["Profit"].sum().reset_index()
Total_profit_by_states_bikes_usa
~~~


### Data Sorting/ Data Ranking

~~~python
# To Determine the Most Importat Metric: Top 5 States by Total profits

# solution 
Top_5_most_profitable_states = Total_profit_by_states_bikes_usa.sort_values("Profit", ascending = False).head(5).reset_index()
Top_5_most_profitable_states
~~~


### Comparizon of the Total Profits Generated by the Top-5 States in the US  to the Entire Total Profits made from the US (Bike products only)


~~~python
# The Total Revenue Generated by the Top 5 Customers

total_profit_of_top_5_states = Top_5_most_profitable_states["Profit"].sum()

total_profit_of_top_5_states
~~~


~~~python
# Entire Total Profits made from the US (Bike products only)

total_profit_of_entire_states = bike_data_usa["Profit"].sum()

total_profit_of_entire_states
~~~


~~~python
# calculating the percentage

percent = ( total_profit_of_top_5_states / total_profit_of_entire_states )  * 100

percent = percent.round(2)

percent
~~~


print(f"the Total profit generated by the top 5-states , account for {percent} % of the company's total profit for usa bikes products")


### Data Visualization


~~~python
#  To uncover the Top 5 most profitable states in a pictorial form.

# solution 

import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

Top_5_most_profitable_states.plot(kind = "bar", x = "CustomerState", y = "Profit", color = "blue")

# axis label
plt.xlabel("CustomerState")
plt.ylabel("Profit")

#title
plt.title("The top 5 Most profitable states for Bikes products in the states")

plt.show()
~~~


### Data Interpretation


The Result from the data visualization above shows that **California**, **Washington**,  **Oregon**, **Florida** and **Wyoming** are the **top-5 states** generating the **highest profits** for **bike products** in the United States.



### Key Findings


---

* The analysis of bike product sales across the United States revealed that **California**, **Washington**, and **Oregon** are the top three states generating the highest profits by a significant margin.

* The top 5 most profitable states and their respective profit figures are as follows:

  | Rank | State      | Total Profit (\$) |
  | ---- | ---------- | ----------------- |
  | 1    | California | 2,247,278.04      |
  | 2    | Washington | 963,999.62        |
  | 3    | Oregon     | 457,411.67        |
  | 4    | Florida    | 3,206.34          |
  | 5    | Wyoming    | 2,868.76          |

* **California alone accounts for over \$2.2 million in profit**, contributes nearly half of the total profit from bike sales nationwide. Indicating a highly dominant market share.


* **Powerful Insight:** The combined total profit from these top 5 states accounts for **99.76% of the total profit** generated across all U.S. states for the bike product category.


* This reveals a **significant concentration of profitability**, with the remaining states contributing less than 0.24% of total profit.

* There is a **sharp drop in profit margins** between Oregon (3rd) and Florida (4th), suggesting a disparity in market performance between the top three states and the rest.

---



### Conclusions


---

* The U.S. market for the bike product is **heavily skewed**, with profitability overwhelmingly concentrated in just only five states accounting for **99.76% of the total profit** generated across all U.S. states for the bike product category.

  
* The remaining states exhibit **minimal or negligible sales impact**, indicating either very low market demand, lack of awareness, or distribution inefficiencies.


* The business is currently **over-reliant on a small subset of regions**, making it vulnerable to regional economic fluctuations or policy changes affecting those states.


* The profitability of bike products is **highly concentrated in the West Coast**, particularly in California, Washington, and Oregon.


* States like Florida and Wyoming, while making the top 5 list, generate **significantly lower profits**, indicating limited market penetration or demand.


* External factors such as **population density, cycling infrastructure, lifestyle preferences, and climate** may be influencing regional demand.

---


### Reconmendation


---

1. **Double Down and Strengthen Sales & Distribution in the Top 5 States**
   Allocate more resources (inventory, marketing budget, local partnerships) and Increase investment in California, Washington, and Oregon—such as to to maintain momentum ,  expand market dominance and defend market share.


2. **Investigate and Conduct Diagnostic Analysis on Low-Performing States**
   Investigate why the remaining  U.S. states contribute less than 1% of total profit. Is it due to poor distribution? Lack of infrastructure? Low demand? Use this to inform turnaround strategies.

3. **Explore Market Diversification**
   To reduce regional dependency, test and pilot tailored campaigns in new promising states with favorable cycling culture, infrastructure, or climate (e.g., Colorado, Arizona, North Carolina).


4. **Scenario Planning & Risk Management**
   Build contingency plans around the top-performing states—since any disruption in these areas could dramatically impact total profitability.

5. **Refine Product Strategy by Region**
   Consider regional customization of product offerings, pricing, or marketing based on the stark difference in performance across states.

6. **Optimize Marketing Strategy**
   Use insights from high-profit regions to craft region-specific campaigns—emphasizing outdoor lifestyle, health, and environmental benefits of biking.

7. **Monitor Trends Over Time**
   Continue to track sales and profitability metrics to identify shifting trends, seasonal patterns, and emerging markets across the country.
---
